Aubergine, green bean, tofu and Thai holy basil stir-fry

Adding a sprinkling of herbs to a finished dish may seem merely decorative, but some also pack a whopping great flavour that belies their delicate appearance. 
One such herb is Thai holy basil: in just one leaf, it has notes of pepper, clove and anise, all of which make today’s stir-fry (an adulterated Thai pad krapow moo) so addictive. Incidentally, it’s called holy basil because, in India, it is the holiest of all plants, worshipped in and out of the kitchen, and often infused in hot water and used as a tonic for sore throats.
Not just a herb, then: medicine, blessings and big flavour all in one.
Thai holy basil can be found in south-east Asian food stores and online. If you can’t get any, use ordinary Thai basil, which is sold in many supermarkets, or even normal basil – it won’t taste the same, but it will still be good.

Sat 20 Jul 2019 10.00 BST

Prep: 10 min
Cook: 1 hr
Serves: 4

3 medium-sized aubergines (around 650g), cut into 2.5cm cubes
Rapeseed oil
Salt
300g fine green beans, tailed
280g plain tofu, cut into 1.5cm cubes
4 banana shallots (around 200g), peeled and finely sliced
2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and grated
7 garlic cloves, peeled and minced
3 red bird’s eye chillies, finely chopped
1 tbsp rice vinegar
2 tbsp kecap manis
2 tbsp dark soy sauce
1 tbsp sesame oil
25g Thai holy basil, picked and torn
1 tbsp fresh lime juice (ie, from 1 lime)
Jasmine rice, to serve

Steps
Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Tip the aubergine cubes into a large baking tray (or two) – make sure they have plenty of room – drizzle over four tablespoons of oil and a teaspoon of salt, toss to coat, then roast for 30 minutes. After this time, scatter the beans on top of the aubergine, stir so they, too, are coated in some of the oil, and roast for 10 minutes more.
Heat two tablespoons of oil in a frying pan, then fry the tofu, stirring regularly, until crisp all over, and transfer to a plate. 
Heat two more tablespoons of oil in the same pan over a medium flame, then add the shallots, ginger, garlic and chillies, and fry, stirring, for 10 minutes, until soft.
Once the shallots are nice and soft, add the vinegar, kecap manis, soy sauce and sesame oil, stir everything together and cook for two minutes. Off the heat, stir in the roast vegetables, fried tofu and half the basil. Squeeze over the lime juice, sprinkle the remaining basil on top and serve hot with freshly steamed jasmine rice.