Autumn pilau with squash, cavolo nero and smoked garlic 

My husband is a gifted cook – he can transform fridge scraps into heavenly meals and cook pasta dishes that nonna would be proud of – but ask him to make rice and he falls apart. It’s not only him: many people I’ve talked to about rice (more than you’d think) struggle to cook fluffy basmati; the fear of turning it to mush runs deep in Britain’s veins.
At best, each grain can be silky, plump and rich with flavour; at worst, bland, clumpy or a sodden mess. But if a nation of a billion (India) can cook the stuff perfectly, so can you: there is no secret, but there are a few tips to help you master it and make it part of your weekly toolkit.
The first step is the wash and soak. Rice has starch in it, which makes rice grains stick together, but washing and soaking rice can help remove it, so wash the rice under cold water until it runs clear, then soak for at least 10 minutes.
You can now either boil the rice, like pasta, in plenty of salted water until the chalky bite in the middle disappears; or go for the absorption method, which is what I’ve used in this week’s pilau. This involves cooking the rice in just the right amount of water (usually, twice the volume of water to rice) by bringing it to a boil, then simmering in a tightly covered pan until all the water is absorbed, along with any other flavours you’ve added to the pan. This way, every grain is flavoured.
The final step is that, like most things, rice is better after it’s had a rest. So, once cooked, leave it to steam for 10 minutes, until the grains magically “stand up like soldiers”, in my mother’s words.
In today’s pilau, I’ve used some of autumn’s finest vegetables – buttery squash, earthy black cabbage – with smoked garlic, which adds a glorious and timely bonfirey-ness to proceedings.
This can be used as a vehicle for leftover Halloween pumpkins. At this time of year, smoked garlic is available in many larger supermarkets; failing that, try thegarlicfarm.co.uk. Serves four.

Sat 28 Oct 2017 09.30 BST

300g basmati rice
1kg squash, halved, deseeded and cut into 1cm half-moons
5 tbsp rapeseed oil
Salt and black pepper
3 brown onions, peeled and thinly sliced 
4 cloves smoked garlic, very thinly sliced
1 ½ tsp ground cumin
1 ½ tsp garam masala
½ tsp turmeric
2 green chillies, finely chopped
1 small bunch coriander, leaves picked, stalks finely chopped
200g cavolo nero, leaves stripped from stalks and roughly chopped (use up the stalks, chopped, in a soup, say)
1 lemon

Steps
Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Rinse the rice until the water runs clear, then soak in warm water until you’re ready to cook it.
Arrange the squash in a single layer on a large baking tray, drizzle over three tablespoons of rapeseed oil and season with a pinch of salt and black pepper, then roast for 30 minutes, until tender.
Meanwhile, heat a large saucepan for which you have a tight-fitting lid on a medium flame, add the remaining rapeseed oil and, when warm, add the sliced onions and smoked garlic. Sweat for eight minutes, then add the spices, chillies, coriander stalks and a teaspoon and three-quarters of salt. Cook for four minutes, until the onions start to brown, then add the cavolo nero.
Gently stir in the soaked and rinsed rice, add 600ml warm water and cover the pan. Turn down the heat to a whisper and leave to cook for 20 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave to steam with the lid still on for a further 10 minutes.
When both the rice and the squash are cooked, gently fold the squash into the rice and pour out on to a platter (or spoon on to individual plates). Serve with a generous squeeze of lemon and a scattering of coriander leaves.