Banana pancakes with maple and tahini yoghurt

Making pancakes sends a smell signal shooting through the house to say that fun is afoot and the weekend has begun. They are an invitation for the family to linger in pyjamas and moonwalk through the kitchen while listening to Stevie Wonder (or the Frozen soundtrack on repeat, as in our house). Bananas are the best friend of anyone who cooks for and with kids, mashable with little hands, creamy and binding too. Combined in this recipe with some store-cupboard staples – oat milk, maple syrup and tahini, they’ll have little and large hands alike reaching out for more. Happy weekend.

Sat 24 Oct 2020 10.30 BST

Prep: 5 min
Cook: 30 min
Makes: 16, to serve 4

For the yoghurt
190g coconut yoghurt
2 tbsp light tahini
1 tbsp maple syrup, plus extra for drizzling

For the pancakes
2 ripe bananas (about 160g peeled weight)
250g self-raising flour
2 tbsp golden caster sugar
1 tsp baking powder
1 pinch fine sea salt
350ml whole oat milk
Coconut oil, to fry
Blueberries, to serve

Steps
Make the tahini yoghurt first by combining all the ingredients in a bowl. Have a taste, add a little more maple syrup, if you wish, and put to one side.
To make the pancakes, put the bananas in a bowl and mash until fairly smooth. Add the flour, sugar, baking powder, sea salt and milk, and whisk together.
Turn the oven on low, to keep your pancakes warm.
Warm a nonstick pan over a medium heat and add a knob of coconut oil. Once melted and sizzling, carefully wipe away any excess oil with paper towel and add a couple of tablespoons of the batter per pancake – depending on the size of your pan, you may be able to cook up to four at a time. As soon as you can see bubbles, after two to three minutes, gently turn over with a spatula and cook on the other side until golden.
Transfer to a plate and keep warm in the oven, and repeat with the rest of the batter, adding a little coconut oil (and wiping away the excess) for each batch.
Serve the pancakes with a dollop of tahini yoghurt, a handful of blueberries and an extra drizzle of maple syrup.