Celeriac, leek and miso dumplings

It’s my belief that everyone loves dumplings. How and what shape those dumplings might take varies from crisp-bottomed gyoza to pillows of ravioli or chubby little flour bombs that sit atop a stew. But the comfort of dumplings is written into the bones of most cultures. The ones in today’s recipe are some of the easiest to make. The wrappers, or wonton skins, are pre-made, so just need filling and folding, and, although that can be an art form in itself, if my four-year-old can press these shut while recounting the plot of the latest Paw Patrol film, I have great faith that you can, too.
I use square wonton wrappers from my local Asian food shop to make these dumplings, but many brands contain egg, so always check the label. If you can’t find them, try gyoza wrappers as a substitute.

Sat 9 Oct 2021 10.30 BST

Prep: 15 min
Cook: 45 min
Makes: About 30

2 tbsp rapeseed oil
150g leek (about 1), trimmed, washed and very finely chopped
100g extra-firm tofu, coarsely grated
2 garlic cloves, peeled and grated
2½ tbsp brown rice miso
150g celeriac, peeled and coarsely grated
1 pack wonton wrappers (suitable for vegans – see recipe introduction)

For the dipping sauce
4 tbsp light soy sauce
2 tbsp toasted sesame oil
1 tbsp white sesame seeds
1 tsp chilli flakes
2 tbsp white-wine vinegar
⅓ cucumber, deseeded and cut into small dice

Steps
Heat the oil in a frying pan and, once hot, add the leek, tofu and garlic, and saute, stirring often, for about four minutes, until the leek has softened. Take off the heat, stir through the miso and grated celeriac, and mix really well until the celeriac starts to wilt.
Put all the ingredients for the sauce in a small serving bowl, and stir to combine.
To make the dumplings, fill a small bowl with water and have the filling and wrappers within easy reach. Lay one wrapper in front of you in a diamond shape and put two teaspoons of filling in the centre. Brush the edges of the wrapper lightly with water, then fold it in half to make a triangle. Press down around the filling (to make sure there are no air bubbles), then press outwards to seal it properly. Repeat with the remaining wrappers and filling.
Bring a medium-large pan of water to a boil. Turn down to a gentle simmer, drop in about six dumplings so as not to crowd the pan, then simmer for four minutes. Using a slotted spoon or spider, transfer to a plate lined with kitchen towel to drain, and repeat with the rest of the dumplings.
Arrange the dumplings on a platter, drizzle over a few tablespoons of the sauce, and serve with the rest of the sauce on the side, for dipping.