Chickpea, chard and sunflower seed egusi with polenta dumplings

People often ask where I get my recipes. Well, here’s the truth: I watch what people put in their baskets at the supermarket and use the sight of something unusual as an excuse to start a conversation. I use innocent social occasions such as an appointment at the hairdressers and time waiting in post office queues to ask people what they cook for themselves in comfort, to celebrate with, or when they have no time at all. I go into Chinese, Sri Lankan and Italian shops and scour the shelves, taking items up to the shopkeeper to ask what possible use they could have for dried kelp slices, long, thin onion flowers or fat-stemmed caper berries.
All this information stacks up like Tetris blocks to weave a picture of how other people live; where they’re from and what they care about. It is partly, or mostly, why I write about food. And, when I’m at my kitchen table, it spurs me to the stove.
Today’s recipe sprung to life from a chat with a Ghanaian woman in an African greengrocer. We were both looking at the same packet of melon seeds, which Indians use thriftily to add protein to and thicken dishes. She said Ghanaians and Nigerians use them in the same way, to make egusi, a leafy vegetable stew spiced with ginger, garlic and scotch bonnet. From a quick conversation and a rough recipe, I took the plunge once again into someone else’s life and loved it. A little reminder to keep talking to strangers, I thought.
This stew is traditionally made with spinach and ground melon seed, but here I’ve used seasonal chard and more readily available sunflower seeds. Be sure to buy quick-cook polenta for the dumplings. You’ll need a food processor. Serves four.

Sat 4 Nov 2017 09.30 GMT

150g sunflower seeds
Salt
200g quick-cook polenta
1 tbsp rapeseed oil
2 brown onions, peeled and finely sliced
3 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed
3cm ginger, peeled and grated 
1 scotch bonnet chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
½ tsp hot-smoked paprika
500g chard, leaves and stalks separated – leaves roughly chopped, stalks chopped into 2cm pieces
2 tbsp tomato puree
400g tinned chickpeas, drained

Steps
Blitz the sunflower seeds to a coarse dust in a food processor, then mix with 150ml of water to make a paste.
Line an oven tray with greaseproof paper and bring a pan filled with 800ml water to a rolling boil. Add three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt, pour in the polenta, then cook, stirring constantly, until the polenta takes on the consistency of stiff mash potato or dough – about eight minutes. Leave to cool for five minutes or so, then take a tablespoon dipped in very cold water and scoop out dumpling-sized portions of the polenta mixture – you should end up with about 15 dumplings. Place these on the tray and leave to one side.
Heat the oil in a large frying pan on a medium flame, and once it’s hot fry the onions, garlic, ginger, chilli and a teaspoon of salt, stirring occasionally, for 15 to 20 minutes, until the onions are completely soft and browning. Add the paprika, chard stalks and tomato puree, leave to cook for two minutes more, then stir in the chickpeas and cook for a minute. Add 500ml hot water to the pan and bring up to a steady simmer.
Once the mix is simmering, stir in the sunflower seed paste. The sauce will appear grainy and have the look of scrambled eggs at this stage, but don’t be alarmed: that’s exactly what you want.
Lay the chard leaves on top of the sauce and scatter over half a teaspoon of salt – do not stir the leaves in. Cover the pan and leave the chard to steam for five minutes.
Remove the lid, stir once or twice to incorporate the cooked leaves, and season to taste. Add the dumplings to the pot briefly, to warm through, then serve the stew in a rimmed plate with the dumplings on the side.