Chocolate and tahini cream tart

My first name is pronounced “Easter”, which makes this a rather confusing time of year, because I hear it said at least half a dozen times a day. For me, actual Easter isn’t Easter without chocolate, so, cliche as it may be, I felt duty-bound to give you a chocolate recipe. The sweetness of this tart is offset by the rich, savoury-sweet tahini cream, which also works as a cake frosting or cheesecake filling (you’ll know what I mean when you experience the flavour and texture). Use a smooth, good-quality tahini such as those made by Belazu or Al Arz, because many others are grainy and bitter; smooth peanut butter would also work very well.
If you don’t have a food processor, put the biscuits in a plastic bag and crush to a coarse crumb with a rolling pin or similar. Finely chop the chocolate, then mix the two with the remaining ingredients for the base.

Sat 9 Apr 2022 10.30 BST

Prep: 10 min
Cook: 45 min
Chill: 4 hr+
Serves: 6-8

For the biscuit base
50g coconut oil
170g ginger nut biscuits (suitable for vegans)
50g dark chocolate, roughly chopped
25g cocoa powder
A pinch of fine salt

For the filling and topping
1 x 397g tin condensed coconut milk – you’ll need 330g for this cake, so save the excess for another use or to dribble on top at the end
200g dark cooking chocolate, (check label) roughly chopped
2 tsp tangerine (or orange) zest
2 tsp white miso paste
1 tsp vanilla bean paste
20g coconut oil
200g unsweetened coconut yoghurt – the one made by Coconut Collab is the perfect thickness here
90g good-quality smooth tahini (I use Belazu) – before measuring, shake vigorously to combine the solids and fat

To finish
1 tbsp cocoa powder
Edible gold dust (optional)
A pinch of flaked salt

Steps
Line the bottom and sides of a 20cm cake tin. For the biscuit base, gently melt the coconut oil, then set aside to cool for a few minutes. Put all the other ingredients for the base in a food processor and pulse to a coarse crumb – you want small chunks of biscuit and chocolate throughout, so don’t over-process. Add the cooled oil, pulse a few more times to combine, then tip into the lined tin and press so it evenly covers the bottom and comes 3cm up the sides. Refrigerate, then start on the filling.
Put 230g condensed coconut milk and all the chopped chocolate in a bowl set over, but not touching, a pan of gently simmering water. Once the chocolate has nearly melted, take off the heat and add the tangerine zest, a teaspoon of miso and a half-teaspoon of vanilla bean paste. Whisk until completely smooth, then spoon over the biscuit base – the mix will be quite thick, so work quickly. Level out the top, then chill for at least four hours (or overnight) until cold and set.
For the topping, gently melt the 20g coconut oil, then leave to cool for a few minutes. Put the coconut yoghurt, tahini, 100g condensed coconut milk, the remaining teaspoon of miso and half-teaspoon of vanilla bean paste, the cooled coconut oil and a good pinch of fine salt in a medium bowl, then whisk vigorously for a minute, until thickened and completely smooth. Refrigerate for at least 40 minutes (or overnight).
Release the tart from its tin and put on a plate. Leave to stand for 20 minutes to come up to room temperature, then spoon the chilled tahini cream on top and use the back of a spoon to make dips all over the surface. Dust with cocoa powder and gold dust, if using, finish with flaked salt and serve.