Clay pot noodles with beetroot, walnut and smoked tofu

Many of us are hardwired to associate celebrations with omnivorous eating, whether that be a steak, a seafood platter or a cream cake. I only realised this recently, when a vegan friend asked me what to cook for a special occasion. For me, the answer is simple: a celebratory dish involves layers of flavour, multiple textures and a little more effort than usual. It’s something that might be attempted only at the weekend – something along the lines of Thai clay pot noodles.
The beetroot, walnut and tofu combine to create some rich, almost meaty flavours and, as a bonus, the noodles turn pink. Smoked tofu and kecap manis can be found in bigger supermarkets and online. While a clay pot is the traditional cooking vessel, a 24-28cm casserole dish will also do here.

Sat 21 Jul 2018 07.00 BST

Prep: 35 min
Cook: 40 min
Serves: 4

180g glass vermicelli noodles1 tbsp light soy sauce1 small red onion, peeled and chopped1.5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled5 garlic cloves, peeled and chopped
400g beetroot, peeled and roughly chopped
80g walnuts, plus 10g extra, to garnish 20g fresh coriander, leaves and stalks separated4 tbsp rapeseed oil1 tsp salt⅔ tsp ground black pepper200g smoked tofu, very thinly sliced widthways (I like Taifun)4 spring onions, white and green parts, finely sliced

For the dressing
2 tbsp light soy sauce
2 tbsp kecap manis
1 tbsp toasted sesame oil
250ml vegetable stock (suitable for vegans)

Steps
Soak the noodles in a large bowl of freshly boiled water until softened – about 10 minutes – then drain and dress with the light soy sauce.
Put the onion, ginger and garlic in a food processor, and pulse to mince. Scrape out the mixture, wash the bowl and repeat with the beetroot, walnuts and coriander stalks.
Heat the oil in a nonstick frying pan over a medium flame and, when hot, fry the minced onion, garlic and ginger paste for 10 minutes, stirring often so it doesn’t catch, until the mix turns a couple of shades darker. Now add the beetroot mixture, cook for 15 minutes, season, then cook for five minutes more, until deep, rich and soft, then turn off the heat.
To make the dressing, mix the soy, kecap manis, toasted sesame oil and stock, and set aside.
To build the noodle pot, put half the smoked tofu in the base in a single layer, followed by half the noodles (you might need to break them up a bit with your hands, or cut them with kitchen scissors). Top the noodles with two-thirds of the beetroot mixture, then add another layer each of the remaining tofu and noodles. Top with the remaining beetroot mixture.
Lightly chop the remaining walnuts and sprinkle over the top with the spring onions. Pour over the dressing, close the lid, put the pot on a medium heat and cook for 12 minutes. Remove the lid, garnish with a handful of finely chopped coriander leaves and serve.