Courgette and mint gözleme

As a child, I loved watching my mother make chapatis: her hands rhythmically rolling the balls of dough; the click of her wedding ring each time the pin moved under it; the thwack as the dough hit the pan, sending a tiny cloud of blackened flour flying; a tower of hot chapatis quickly forming in the background.
Although I can recreate those same chapatis in my own kitchen, I can’t replicate the experience. Which is why I’m so drawn to north London’s Turkish cafes. Unlike kebab houses, which have a distinctly masculine presence, these cafes tend to have a formidable woman in the window. My local is Zena’s domain. Her low stool is like a throne from which she wields a giant wooden spatula, regularly pointed at her husband or son, between fulfilling insatiable orders for her gözleme.
Gözleme is a masterpiece in simplicity: a ball of dough and a little filling – potato, spinach and/or, for non-vegans, cheese – come together to form a fresh, hot filled flatbread that’s much greater than the sum of its parts. It doesn’t boast the many flavours and textures of a burrito, and it’s not as quick to make as a sandwich, but it tastes how I want all the food I yearn for to taste: as if handmade with the care and grace of someone’s mother.
Gözleme is best filled in much the same way as you’d layer a pizza: with just enough filling to make it delicious, but not so much as to make it soggy. If you have leftover filling, don’t be tempted to over-stuff the gözleme; instead, eat it separately. Yellow courgettes look very nice here, but they’re not essential. The dough takes an hour to prove. Ideally, you’d have a flat pan (like a pancake or chapati pan) to cook this on. Serves four.

Sat 16 Sep 2017 09.30 BST

For the dough
300g plain flour 
1 tsp (or 5g) fast-action yeast 
½ tsp salt 
3 tbsp olive oil 

For the filling 
750g courgettes (a mixture of green and yellow, if possible)
3 tbsp olive oil 
4 garlic cloves, peeled and very finely chopped
¾ tsp red chilli flakes 
¾ tsp salt 
1 small handful fresh mint leaves, very finely shredded 

Steps
Put the flour, yeast, salt and oil into a big bowl (ie, large enough for the dough to double in size) and mix together with your hands until it resembles breadcrumbs. Fill a jug with 140ml hand-hot water, then slowly add to the dough, mixing as you go. Knead for five minutes, until you have a soft and springy dough, then cover with clingfilm and leave on the worktop for an hour.
Meanwhile, get on with the filling. Cut the courgettes into discs as thick as a £1 coin. Heat the oil in a wide frying pan on a medium heat and, when hot, sizzle the garlic for a couple of minutes. Add the courgettes, chilli and salt, stir to combine, then cook gently for 25 minutes, stirring now and then, until all the liquid has evaporated. Leave to cool, then stir in the mint.
When you’re ready to cook the gözleme, cut the dough into four equal pieces. Lightly flour a work surface and roll out one piece into a large oval (around 28cm x 32cm), until nice and thin. Lay courgette coins over the dough in a single layer, making sure they barely overlap, and leaving a 5cm border at the top and bottom and an 8cm gap at the sides. Fold the flaps at the top and bottom over the filling, then fold in the sides to meet in the middle. Repeat with the remaining pieces of dough and filling.
Heat a large frying pan and, when hot, carefully lift one gozleme into the pan. Cook for a minute, until it blisters, then flip and cook for another minute. Flip and cook for 30 seconds more on each side, then transfer to a plate or board. Repeat with the remaining gözleme, cut them all into four and serve hot.