Festive pilau with beetroot, cauliflower and coriander chutney

Every Indian auntie has a special pilau recipe that finds its way on to the table at birthdays, parties and New Year, and it is often the subject of hushed-toned debate in kitchens and Hindu temples alike. “I think Asha uses MSG in hers,” I once heard one auntie whisper.
Now, pilau might sound humdrum, seeing as we Indians eat rice every day, but with a little elaboration and extra effort, it becomes one of the most celebratory dishes a person could eat. Layer upon layer of unbridled joy: each grain of rice is rich, plump and flavourful; morsels of burnished vegetables lie beneath, ready to be unearthed; and bright, tannic bursts of pomegranate and tongue-searing chillies slice through the comfort blanket.
Of course, it isn’t just about the flavour, but the ritual, too. Pilaus have been at the heart of our family celebrations from when I could barely see over the kitchen table and they have earned their place in tradition as a familiar friend.
I am now an auntie myself, and this is my special recipe. I’d be thrilled if it became the topic of conversation in someone else’s kitchen.
This needs only some oil-dressed leaves (watercress, say) to become a complete meal. Serves four.

Sat 23 Dec 2017 09.30 GMT

300g basmati rice
600g cauliflower (ie ½ a big one), broken into bite-sized florets
400g beetroot, peeled and cut in wedges 
300g swede (ie ½ a small one), peeled and cut into 1cm x 3cm slices 
Salt
2 ½ tsp garam masala 
Rapeseed oil
Salt 
400ml tin coconut milk 
6 garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped 
2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled
2 green finger chillies 
1 tsp turmeric
1 large onion, peeled and finely sliced
100g fresh coriander 
1 tbsp lemon juice 
1 tsp caster sugar
2 handfuls pomegranate seeds (ie, from ½ pomegranate), to top 

Steps
Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas mark 6. Wash the rice until the water runs clear, then leave to soak in cold water. Put the cauliflower on a baking tray in a single layer and put the swede and beetroot on another baking sheet in a single layer.
In a small bowl, mix the garam masala, five tablespoons of rapeseed oil and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt, then drizzle over the veg on both trays and toss to coat. Roast for 25-30 minutes, until tender and caramelised in places (the swede and beetroot may need a little longer).
While the vegetables are cooking, make the sauce for the rice. Put three-quarters of the coconut milk (the remaining 100ml will go in the chutney) into a blender with the garlic, ginger, one green chilli, turmeric and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt, then blitz smooth.
In a large frying pan for which you have a tight-fitting lid, heat two tablespoons of oil on a medium heat, then fry the onion for 10-12 minutes, until soft and golden. Add the coconut sauce and cook for eight minutes, stirring frequently.
Add the drained rice with 400ml freshly boiled water to the pan, and bring to a boil. Put on the lid, turn down the heat to a whisper and leave to cook for 20 minutes, until the rice is cooked through. Take off the heat, fold through the roasted vegetables, pop the lid back on and leave to steam for 10 minutes.
While the rice is steaming, make the chutney. Rinse the blender and add the remaining coconut milk, the coriander (reserve a small handful to garnish the dish later), a green chilli, the lemon juice, sugar and half a teaspoon of salt. Blend smooth, then scrape into a serving bowl.
Transfer the rice to a platter, sprinkle with the pomegranate seeds and reserved coriander, and serve with the bowl of chutney alongside.