Kadhi with fried chickpeas

Kadhi is one of India’s secretly most popular dishes. You won’t find it on restaurant menus, and it’s not something that’s traditionally cooked for guests, either – so the recipe has rarely left the Indian home. Traditionally, it’s eaten week in, week out in Indian houses, because it’s quick, delicious and makes light work of those store-cupboard favourites, chickpea flour and leftover yoghurt (many Indians make their own). Punjabis add fried onion pakoras and in Maharashtra they use tamarind, but in the Sodha household, we eat it like this: spiced with cumin and curry leaves, spiked with lemon juice, and served with fried chickpeas and a bowl of hot rice.

Sat 14 Nov 2020 10.30 GMT

Prep: 10 min
Cook: 15 min
Serves: 2

Rapeseed oil 
8 fresh curry leaves
1 tsp cumin seeds, roughly bashed
1 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained 
Juice of 1 lemon
Fine sea salt 
250g vegan yoghurt – I like Alpro no-sugar 
6 tbsp gram flour (AKA chickpea flour)
1cm-long piece fresh ginger, peeled and grated 
1 green Indian finger chilli, chopped 
½ tsp turmeric 
2 pinches ground cloves 
Cooked rice, to serve

Steps
First, make the fried chickpeas. Pour a couple of tablespoons of oil into a medium-sized saucepan on a medium heat and, when hot, add four curry leaves and half the cumin seeds. Let them crackle and pop, then add the drained chickpeas and fry for five minutes, until golden and crisp. Off the heat, stir in a tablespoon of lemon juice and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt, then tip into a bowl and leave to one side. Keep the pan handy for the kadhi.
To make the kadhi, in a bowl, whisk the yoghurt, gram flour, ginger, chilli, turmeric, cloves and a teaspoon of salt, then little by little stir in 500ml cold water. Heat two tablespoons of oil in the empty chickpea pan and, when hot, add the rest of the curry leaves and cumin. When they start to crackle, turn the heat right down and take the pan off the heat for a minute, to cool. Put it back on a low heat, slowly pour in the gram flour mixture and cook, stirring, for five minutes, until the mix thickens up. Take off the heat and stir in two teaspoons of lemon juice, or to taste.
Transfer the kadhi to a serving bowl, gently sprinkle the fried chickpeas over the top and serve with rice.