Most popular

Sometimes, all you really want is something with that sort of filthy and delicious taste that I used to think only a good takeaway could provide – until I accidentally recreated it while writing this recipe for Malaysian nasi goreng. It’s fried rice, but not as you know it: smothered in unami-ific sauces, and topped with shredded, marinated sprouts for crunch and zing. All the joy of a takeaway, but without the wait or delivery charge.
Kecap manis is a sweet soy sauce that can be found in larger supermarkets, online and in south-east Asian food shops. I cut the sprouts by hand, but you could use the slicing attachment on a food processor.

Sat 20 Jan 2018 09.00 GMT

Prep: 10 min
Cook: 30 min
Serves: 4

350g jasmine rice
3 tbsp rapeseed oil 
1 red onion, peeled and chopped 
4 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 
3 bird’s eye chillies, very finely chopped (deseeded, if you prefer less heat)
750g brussels sprouts, very finely sliced 
2 tbsp tomato puree
2 tbsp kecap manis
1 ¼ tsp salt
2 tbsp soy sauce 
1 tbsp white-wine vinegar 
2 tbsp toasted sesame oil 
1 tsp sugar

Steps
Put the rice in a sieve and wash under the cold tap until the water runs clear. Tip the rice into a pan, add 500ml fresh cold water and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat to a whisper, cover the pan and leave to cook for 15 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave with the lid still on, to steam through.
To cook the nasi goreng base, heat the rapeseed oil in a large frying pan on a medium flame and, when hot, fry the onion, stirring, for five minutes. Add the garlic and two-thirds of the chopped chillies, cook for two minutes more, then add all but two large handfuls (or about 150g) of the sprouts. Fry for eight minutes, leaving them undisturbed for a couple of minutes at a time, so they get some colour on them. Then stir in the tomato puree, kecap manis, salt and a tablespoon each of soy sauce and vinegar. Cook for another five minutes, then take off the heat.
To make the marinated sprouts, put the remaining raw sliced sprouts in a bowl with the soy sauce, white-wine vinegar, toasted sesame oil, sugar and the remaining chopped chilli. Mix very well and set aside.
To finish the nasi goreng, put the sprout and onion pan on a medium heat and gently scoop in the steamed rice, folding it in until well mixed. Heat through, stirring gently, for five minutes, until the rice is nice and hot, and season to taste. Transfer to a big platter, scatter the marinated sprouts over the top and serve.
Photography: Rob White. Food stylist: Amy Stephenson.