Mouth-numbing noodles with chilli oil and red cabbage

We need to talk about heat – the kind that comes from fresh chillies and peppercorns, and also from ginger, horseradish or too much garlic. Each plays a different, nuanced role, but our undeveloped language when talking about discrete types of heat mean they’re usually described in a one-size-fits-all way, as simply “mild”, “medium” or “hot”.
Understanding the various types of heat that various ingredients offer is an important skill for any cook, and can make the difference between a successful meal or slow, culinary torture. Some heat hits you smack at the top of your head, as wasabi and mustard do, and feels as though you need a whale’s blowhole for it ever to escape. Other heat, such as that of ground Kashmiri chilli or black pepper, has a gentle, rounded flavour that builds gently to make you feel as though you’re carrying a hot-water bottle in your stomach.
Bird’s-eye chillies are the ones to watch out for: unless combined with a heady dose of sugar and lime, as they are in Thai cooking, they can unleash an unholy hell in your mouth that lifts you out of your pants. My favourites are those slim, green Indian finger chillies that have just enough buzz to tickle you behind the ears.
The hero of today’s recipe is the Sichuan peppercorn. Muddy pink in colour, smelling of grapefruit and lending an unusual citrus flavour to whatever they touch, they create a unique, lip-tingling and mouth-numbing sensation that isn’t at all hot. In fact, they’re so gentle that, in Sichuan cooking, chilli flakes are often added to pep them up.
This is an elegant dish that won’t leave you on your knees. The noodles are coated in peanut butter and mixed with as little or as much chilli pepper oil as you like, all freshened up with some gently pickled red cabbage. You’ll need a blender or electric spice grinder. Any leftover chilli oil can be kept in the fridge. Serves four.

Sat 30 Sep 2017 09.29 BST

For the cabbage pickle
220g red cabbage (ie, about ⅓ cabbage), cored and finely shredded 
½ cucumber, seeds removed and sliced into thin strips
1 handful mint leaves, roughly chopped
4 tbsp rice vinegar
1 tbsp toasted sesame oil
Salt
1 tbsp sesame seeds

2 tbsp Sichuan peppercorns
4 tbsp dried chilli flakes
6 tbsp rapeseed oil
4 garlic cloves, finely chopped
1 tsp caster sugar

For the noodles
4 tbsp crunchy peanut butter
4 tbsp sesame oil
400g dried wheat noodles 

Steps
For the mouth-numbing chilli oil
Put the cabbage, cucumber and mint in a bowl, add the vinegar, sesame oil and a pinch of salt, and mix with your hands. Scatter with sesame seeds and leave to one side.
In a blender or spice grinder, blitz the peppercorns and chilli flakes to a rough powder. Heat the oil on a medium flame, then add the garlic and let it sizzle for a minute or two, until it turns a pale gold. Stir in the sugar, half a teaspoon of salt and the ground peppercorn and chilli mixture, and take off the heat.
In a bowl, mix the peanut butter and sesame oil for the noodles with a third of a teaspoon of salt. Cook the noodles according to the packet instructions, then drain, rinse under cold water and drain again.
Put the noodles in a bowl and add two tablespoons of chilli oil and the peanut mixture. Toss with your hands, making sure all the noodles are well coated, then season to taste.
To serve, lift the noodles on to a platter (or four shallow bowls), top with a handful of the sharp crunchy cabbage, then add a drizzle of chilli oil, depending on your threshold for mouth-numbing heat.