Mushroom mapo tofu

Mapo tofu is a well-loved Sichuan dish that originated in Chengdu centuries ago. The fact that it is still going, globally in most Sichuan restaurants and weekly in the Sodha household, gives you some idea of its popularity. This version of the dish, stripped to its bones, is made with meaty shiitake mushrooms, leeks and broth, all layered over with bright Sichuan peppercorns and a magical sauce (toban djan) made of fermented broad beans. The result is flavour amplified – and that never grows old.
Many big supermarkets stock the Lee Kum Kee fermented broad bean paste, which is also labelled chilli bean sauce. The salted black beans, however, are not so easily found: look online or in Chinese supermarkets. If you can’t find them, just leave them out and season the dish to taste.

Sat 27 Oct 2018 10.00 BST

Prep: 15 min
Cook: 15 min
Serves: 4

1½ tsp Sichuan peppercorns 
2 tbsp rapeseed oil 
3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced
1.5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and grated
200g fresh shiitake mushrooms, finely chopped 
1 large leek (about 400g), cut into thin rounds
2 tbsp toasted sesame oil 
2 tbsp chilli bean sauce – I like Lee Kum Kee 
1 tbsp dark soy sauce 
2 tsp salted fermented black beans, rinsed and chopped – I like the ZF brand (optional)
400g firm tofu, cut into 1.5cm x 1.5cm cubes – I like Tofoo
500ml vegetable stock (suitable for vegans) 
1½ tbsp cornflour, mixed with 1½ tbsp water

Steps
Grind the Sichuan peppercorns in a mortar until very well ground. Take a sniff and revel in their strange and wonderful grapefruit smell.
Heat the oil in large frying pan on a medium flame and, once hot, add the garlic and ginger, and stir-fry for two minutes. Add the mushrooms, cook for six minutes, then add the leeks and stir-fry for a further two minutes, until they soften and unravel. Transfer the vegetables to a bowl.
Put the sesame oil, ground Sichuan peppercorns, chilli bean sauce, soy sauce and black beans in the same pan, and fry for a couple of minutes, until the oil separates. Add the tofu, stir to coat, then return the vegetables to the pan. Pour over the stock, bring to a boil, then stir in the cornflour paste and heat until the sauce thickens. Take off the heat and serve with plain white rice.