Samphire, potato and chickpea chaat

‘Viking, North Utsire, 3 or 4, moderate, South Utsire, rain later, good”: the shipping forecast is a wonderfully British institution, and the gentlest reminder that we live on an island and shouldn’t forget it. Unfortunately, I often do forget, especially when thinking about food.
Yes, we are famous for our love of fish and chips and fish pies, but what about all the delicious vegetables that grow on our coast? In east Asia, culinary traditions are defined not only by what creatures swim in the sea, but also by what grows on the shore. In Japan, nori is eaten daily wrapped around sushi rice, while kombu, a type of kelp, is used in stocks and soups to add deeply savoury umami notes; in China and Korea, enthusiasm for sea vegetables, especially kelp noodles, doesn’t lag far behind.
Kelp, seaweed, sea lettuce, laver, sea aster and dulse are all abundant in the UK, but until fairly recently were only available from specialist retailers or the fishmonger (an unsociable place for a vegan). Only now are they being liberated and sold alongside other fruit and veg in our supermarkets.
Samphire is my favourite, not least for its unique flavour and texture: it’s bold, briny, fresh and crisp, like a burst of sea spray. It’s transportative, too: one bite, and I’m back by the sea in Cleethorpes with sand in my shoes. It can be bitter, yes, but in a way that reminds you that you’re not eating something grown in a polytunnel. It is stubborn, special and wild.
In today’s warm salad, I’ve put samphire centre stage, combining it with soft, creamy potatoes and chickpeas, cut with a little lemon, so you get that delicious salt, sour and crunch with every mouthful. Chaat literally means “to lick” in Hindi, and chaat masala is a spice mixture that is often sprinkled on Indian street food to give it an impossibly addictive quality. Just like the shipping forecast, this dish is a gentle reminder of the wonderful island we all live on.
Be liberal with the oil and lemon, and this will make a good lunch with crusty bread and some non-dairy yoghurt. You can get amchur, or mango powder, from Asian grocers; failing that, it’s easy to buy online. Samphire is available in many supermarkets, but is only good until the end of August, after which it will be too woody to bother with. Serves two for lunch or four as a side dish.

Sat 5 Aug 2017 09.30 BST

For the chaat masala
1 tsp ground cumin 
1 tsp amchur (mango powder) 
½ tsp ground ginger 
⅓ tsp salt
⅓ tsp chilli powder
⅓ tsp black pepper

For the salad
3½-4 tbsp rapeseed oil, for frying and dressing 
500g new or charlotte potatoes, unpeeled, chopped into 1cm dice
400g tinned unsalted chickpeas, drained 
100g samphire, cleaned
½ lemon, cut into wedges

Steps
First make the chaat masala. In a small bowl, mix all the ingredients until well combined, then set aside.
In a large frying pan for which you have a lid, heat two tablespoons of oil on a medium flame and, once it’s hot, fry the potatoes, stirring them every now and then, for 15 minutes, until crisp outside and tender within. When done, tip the potatoes into a large serving bowl.
Put another tablespoon of oil in the pan, turn the heat up high and, once hot, fry the chickpeas for three to five minutes, until they start to turn golden, then add to the spuds.
Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil, drop in the samphire and blanch for two minutes. Drain, leave to steam-dry for a minute, then add to the potatoes and chickpeas.
Toss the chaat masala into the salad, drizzle on a little oil and squeeze over a couple of lemon wedges. Mix again, adjust the seasoning, then add more lemon juice until it tastes just right to you.