Shiitake rice with chilli pecan oil

I once worked briefly at Tate Modern, and while I was there, I learned about automatic drawing, where an artist paints or draws without thinking, with a view to exploring the subconscious mind. Now, I’m definitely not claiming to be an artist, but I confess I hadn’t made a proper plan before starting to write today’s recipe, so it may tell you something about my deepest, darkest thoughts. Well, that or just what’s in my store cupboard. Either way, the dried mushrooms alongside the miso, soy and Shaoxing wine make a deep, flavourful stock in which to cook the rice, while the pecans, chilli and pickled ginger add whopping great crunch, heat and sharpness to the final dish.
You’ll need a wide, deep-sided frying pan with a tight-fitting lid to make this. The pink pickled ginger, or benishoga, really lifts the finished dish, so do hunt some down (I get mine from the Japan Centre in London, which also sells it online). It’s different from sushi ginger (which is sweeter and paler), although you could sub that if you can’t find the pink pickled stuff.

Sat 7 Nov 2020 10.30 GMT

Prep: 15 min
Cook: 45 min
Serves: 4

15g dried shiitake mushrooms 
Rapeseed oil 
1 onion, peeled and finely sliced
3 garlic cloves, peeled and grated 
400g fresh mushrooms - half wild (or mixed) and half chestnut, all finely sliced 
2 tbsp brown rice miso 
350g jasmine rice, washed
2 tbsp light soy sauce 
2 tbsp Shaoxing wine
Fine sea salt 
50g pecans, finely chopped 
1 tbsp chipotle chilli flakes
4 spring onions, finely sliced
1½ tbsp white-wine vinegar 
Pickled pink ginger, to serve

Steps
Boil the kettle and put the dried shiitake into a heat-proof jug. Pour over 500ml freshly boiled water, leave to soak for 20 minutes, then lift out the mushrooms and squeeze them out into the jug. Top up the mushroom stock in the jug to 450ml with tap water, if need be. Finely slice the squeezed mushrooms and put to one side.
Heat two and a half tablespoons of oil in a frying pan for which you have a lid and, when hot, add the onion and fry for eight minutes, until soft. Add the garlic, fry for three minutes more, then add both the soaked and fresh mushrooms and cook for another five minutes or so, until the mushrooms have softened and reduced in volume. Stir in the miso and cook for three or four minutes, until the mushrooms start to caramelise.
Add the rice to the pan, stir to coat the grains in the mushroom mixture, then pour in the mushroom stock, soy sauce, Shaoxing wine and a quarter-teaspoon of salt. Stir again, bring to a boil, pop on the lid, turn down the heat to a simmer and cook for 15 minutes. After this time, turn off the heat but don’t lift the lid, and leave to steam through for at least five minutes.
While the rice is cooking, make the pecan oil. Put the pecans, chilli flakes, spring onions (reserve a tablespoon to garnish) and vinegar in a small saucepan with 75ml oil and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt. Briefly bring to a boil on a medium heat, then turn off the heat.
Divide the rice between four plates, scatter over the pink pickled ginger and the reserved spring onions, drizzle with the pecan oil to taste, and serve.