Squash and courgette salad with pitta, pomegranate and tahini

The word “salad” can mean many different things. Some are team players – salads that work well as part of an array of other dishes. Some provide light refreshment – a little bit of cold crunch on the side. But at this time of year, as the temperature dips, I gravitate towards big, hearty salads: standalone numbers that can fill even the hungriest of stomachs with all the colours of the autumn trees, and with warming flavours to boot.

Sat 22 Sep 2018 10.00 BST

Prep: 20 min
Cook: 1 hr
Serves: 4

1 small butternut squash (800g net weight), cut into 1cm semi-circles 
1 red onion, peeled and cut into wedges 
Olive oil 
1 tsp pul biber (Turkish chilli flakes or a mix of sweet paprika and cayenne pepper) 
½ tsp ground cumin 
Salt
Seeds of ½ pomegranate 
1 ½ tbsp pomegranate molasses 
5 tbsp non-dairy yoghurt
1 ½ tbsp tahini
½ tbsp lemon juice
2 courgettes (450g)
2 wholemeal pitta breads
1 handful mint leaves, shredded

Steps
Heat the oven to 220C/425F/gas 7, fire up the grill to max and line three baking trays with foil.
Put the squash and onion into a bowl, add three tablespoons of oil, the pul biber, cumin and half a teaspoon of salt, and toss with your hands until well coated. Layer on to two trays and bake for 30-40 minutes, turning once halfway, until the squash is charred at the edges.
In the same bowl, mix the pomegranate seeds and molasses with a tablespoon of oil, squeezing some of the pomegranate jewels as you go to release their juices into the dressing.
In another bowl, mix the yoghurt, tahini, lemon juice and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, and add one to two tablespoons of water until you have a sauce you can drizzle.
Put the courgettes under the grill for 12-15 minutes, turning them every now and then, until blackened in places but still quite firm, then remove and leave to cool. When cool, roughly chop into cubes.
To crisp the pitta bread, cut it into rough shards (like tortilla chips), separate, brush liberally with oil and bake for three minutes on each side (watch carefully, because they burn easily), then take out of the oven.
To assemble the salad, put a third of the squash and onion on a serving plate, then top with a third of the courgette and pitta bread. Repeat twice more, to layer everything up, then sprinkle over the mint. Drizzle over the tahini sauce, pour over the pomegranate dressing and serve.