Summer galette with new potatoes, rocket and artichokes

Once you discover the versatility of the galette and its ability to act as a template, it’s hard not to look at everything in the world with one question: could I put it in a galette? It’s the home cook’s best friend in that the messier and more rustic it is, the better it looks. It’s also a way of clearing out the fridge and cupboards, and it’s the reassuringly forgiving anti-Bake Off recipe. In this one, I’ve lined up some of my favourite summer ingredients, but if you’re missing one or the other, treat this as a suggestion rather than a recipe. 

Sat 20 Jun 2020 10.30 BST

Prep: 15 min, + 30 min chill time
Cook: 1 hr
Serves: 4

For the pastry
260g plain flour 
130g sunflower spread – I like Biona 
2 tsp lemon thyme leaves, chopped 
½ tsp fine salt 

For the filling 
2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil
1 red onion, peeled and thinly sliced into half-moons
2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 
20 spring onions, finely sliced
250g new potatoes (ie, 3 or 4 potatoes), cut into 2-3mm slices
150g jarred chargrilled artichokes
2 tsp dijon mustard
Zest of 1 lemon
½ tsp fine sea salt
2 large handfuls rocket (ie, about 50g)
30g pine nuts

Steps
Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. For the pastry, put the flour, sunflower spread, lemon thyme and salt into a bowl, and mix with your fingertips until it’s the consistency of breadcrumbs. Pour in two tablespoons of cold water and mix again, this time with a wooden spoon, until the mixture comes together into a dough.
Use your hands to bring the dough together into a ball, then flatten into a disc, wrap in greaseproof paper and chill in the fridge for 30 minutes.
Heat two tablespoons of oil in a pan, add the sliced onion and saute on a medium heat for six minutes, to soften. Add the garlic and spring onions, cook for another four minutes until they, too, are soft, then turn off the heat and stir in the potato, artichokes, mustard, lemon zest, salt and half the rocket. 
Working quickly now, line a work surface with greaseproof paper, put the unwrapped pastry disc on top and roll out into a 30cm round. Tip the filling into the centre of the pastry and spread it outwards in an even layer, leaving a 4cm border all around the outside. 
Fold the sides of the pastry up over the filling, then slide the galette on to a flat oven tray. Bake for 45 minutes, then top with the pine nuts and remaining rocket, drizzle all over with olive oil and cook for five minutes more, until the pastry is deep golden, the potatoes are cooked through and the rocket is just wilted. 
Remove the galette from the oven, leave to cool, and serve warm or at room temperature with a sharp, crisp green salad alongside.