Swede and mushroom tacos with peanut salsa

I’m very fond of the swede. It has a bit of the Cinderella narrative about it: often cast aside and underappreciated, but, when given attention and love, it blossoms – in this particular story, into a delicious dinner. It’s such a star, you can cook it in any way there is to cook an ingredient, but roasting is my favourite approach. Then it becomes buttery and fondant-like, and in today’s recipe sits pretty among mushrooms, spice and peanut salsa.

Sat 20 Mar 2021 10.30 GMT

Prep: 15 min
Cook: 45 min
Serves: 4

Rapeseed oil
1 tbsp ancho flakes
¼ tsp ground cloves
½ tsp ground cumin
1 tbsp chipotle flakes
Fine sea salt
1 swede (about 800g), peeled, cut in half and then into 1cm slices
1 red onion, peeled and cut into 1½cm wedges
300g portobello mushrooms, cut into 1cm slices
5 fat garlic cloves, peeled and halved
100g salted roasted peanuts
2½ tsp cider vinegar
Tortillas (flour or corn), to serve 
A few coriander leaves, chopped, to serve (optional) 

Steps
Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. First, make the dressing: put five tablespoons of oil, the ancho flakes, cloves, cumin, half a tablespoon of chipotle flakes and a teaspoon of salt into a small bowl, and stir to combine.
In a large bowl, mix the swede with half of the spiced oil, toss with your hands to coat, then tip out on to an oven tray. In the same large bowl, mix the onion, mushrooms and the rest of the spiced oil, toss and tip out on to a second oven tray. Space out all the vegetables so they’re not on top of each other. Bake the mushrooms and onions for 20 minutes and the swede for 30 minutes, until all the vegetables are soft and starting to caramelise.
While the vegetables are roasting, make the salsa. Put 75ml rapeseed oil in a small saucepan with the garlic halves and peanuts, set over a low heat and bring slowly to a boil. Turn down the heat to a simmer and cook for four to five minutes, or until the garlic starts to colour. Take off the heat, add half a tablespoon of chipotle flakes and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, and set aside to cool. Once cooled, add the vinegar and seven tablespoons (105ml) of water, then blitz with a stick blender until the salsa is the consistency of custard.
To serve, heat up the tortillas (I pan-fry mine), top each with a dollop of the salsa, top that with some swede and then with mushrooms and onions, scatter with coriander leaves, if using, and devour.