Thai yellow curry with green beans and potatoes

I enjoy the rather simplistic naming of the Thai curries: yellow, red and green. Straightforward names for complex dishes is a genius bit of marketing that has made their journey to westerners’ plates all the easier. I’ve already written recipes for green and red in this column, which I think (in short) are defined by their corresponding chillies: the green is fresh, sweet and light; the red warmer and richer. The yellow, however, is not characterised by chilli at all, but instead by the coming together of a great lineup of aromatics that includes lemongrass, turmeric, ginger, makrut lime, cumin and coriander.
You can buy makrut lime leaves fresh or frozen; the dried ones, however, are, in my opinion, a bit useless. I’ve recommended using a waxy potato in this over a starchy one, so it soaks up less of the sauce and leaves you with a better sauce-to-potato ratio, but use whatever you have at home. You’ll need a blender to make this, incidentally.

Sat 11 Dec 2021 10.30 GMT

Prep: 15 min
Cook: 30 min
Serves: 4

1 large banana shallot (or 2 small ones), peeled and roughly chopped
1 whole garlic head (about 15 cloves), separated and peeled
2 sticks lemongrass, outer leaves removed, the rest bruised and chopped
4cm x 4cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and chopped
4 bird’s-eye chillies, chopped (remove and discard the pith and seeds if you prefer less heat)
4 makrut lime leaves
1 tsp ground turmeric
½ tsp ground cumin
1 tsp ground coriander
1½ tsp fine sea salt
2 x 400ml tins coconut milk
600g waxy potatoes (such as charlottes), quartered
2 tbsp rapeseed oil
400g green beans, tailed
Steamed rice, to serve

Steps
First make the curry paste. Put all the ingredients apart from the coconut milk, potatoes, oil and beans in a blender, add four or five tablespoons of coconut milk, and blitz for a minute or so, until you have a nice, smooth paste. Put to one side.
Bring a pan of water to a boil, carefully lower in the potatoes and cook for 10-12 minutes, until a knife slips easily in and out. Drain and set aside while you start on the curry.
Put the oil in a wide saucepan for which you have a lid, set it over a medium heat and, once it’s hot, stir-fry the curry paste for five minutes, until it starts to darken slightly in colour and turn noticeably fragrant.
When the paste starts to look a little oily as the fat splits out of it – that’s a good sign, by the way, so don’t be alarmed – add the rest of the coconut milk and 200ml water, and bring to a simmer. Add the cooked potatoes and the green beans, bring everything back up to a simmer, cover and cook for five to six minutes longer, until the beans are cooked and the curry has reduced and thickened slightly. Serve with steamed plain rice.