Tomato, pistachio and saffron tart

I believe in low-effort, high-reward cooking, especially when it’s nice outside and too hot to spend much time in the kitchen. That’s when we all need shortcuts, and this tart is a good example. There’s not much to the making of it: the pastry is ready-made, the nuts and coconut milk form a base at the push of a button, leaving you just the short task of frying some onions, layering the tomatoes and popping it in the oven before eating.
This is very filling because of the nuts and coconut milk, so you won’t need much alongside. You can buy readymade vegan puff pastry in blocks or sheets. Buy full-fat coconut milk, don’t shake the can, and leave it to settle so you can scrape the thick cream from the top. You’ll need a food processor and a big oven tray about 45cm x 30cm.

Sat 9 Jun 2018 09.30 BST

Prep: 20 min
Cook: 40 min
Serves: 4

Rapeseed oil 
2 red onions, peeled, halved and thinly sliced 
2 tsp tamarind paste 
Salt 
100g unsalted pistachio kernels 
50g ground almonds
3 garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped 
1½ tsp ground cumin 
1½ tsp ground coriander 
¾ tsp ground cinnamon 
1 big pinch saffron 
200ml top of tinned coconut milk
320g shop-bought puff pastry sheet
600g mixed best tomatoes (ie, datterini and vine), halved or sliced

Steps
Heat the oven to 220C/425F/gas 7. Put three tablespoons of oil in a large frying pan on a medium flame and, once hot, add the onions and cook for up to 15 minutes, stirring occasionally, until soft, caramelised and sweet. Stir in the tamarind paste and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, then scrape into a bowl.
Put all the nuts, garlic, spices, saffron and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt in the bowl of a food processor. Open the coconut milk, scrape the 200ml of cream at the top into the bowl, then process to a smooth paste.
To build the tart, line a large baking tray with greaseproof paper and lay the pastry sheet on top. With a small knife, score a line all around the pastry 1cm away from the edge. Using a knife or the back of a large spoon, spread the pistachio paste evenly over the pastry within the 1cm border, then carefully spread the onion mix over the paste. Lay the tomato halves cut side up, on top – make sure they’re very close to each other, because the tomatoes will shrink when they cook – then drizzle with oil and sprinkle with a little salt.
Bake for 25 minutes, turning the tart once halfway through, until the tomatoes are slightly blackened and the pastry’s edges have puffed up.
Serve with a fresh salad (that doesn’t contain tomatoes).