Whole pumpkin and walnut biryani

Because they’re so often associated with Halloween or Cinderella’s preferred mode of transport, we can, perhaps, forget actually to eat pumpkins. In this recipe, it is many things: a delicious ingredient in its own right, a host for spiced rice tangled with onions and nuts, and best of all, a very special dish to share at the Christmas table. Have a magical Christmas one and all.
The type of pumpkin you buy is key here. Delica is the best for flavour and sweetness, and its skin can be eaten, too, but a large crown prince or kabocha squash would also work. Avoid the big orange ones, though – they’re great for carving scary faces into, but not very nice for eating.

Sat 8 Dec 2018 10.00 GMT

Prep: 25 min
Cook: 1 hr 40 min
Serves: 4-6

150g basmati and wild rice 
1.3kg-1.5kg delica pumpkin 
¾ tsp salt, or to taste 
1 tsp fennel seeds 
1 tsp cumin seeds 
¾ tsp ground cinnamon 
Rapeseed oil
1 large brown onion, peeled and finely sliced
4 fat garlic cloves, peeled and minced 
1cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and grated 
1 tbsp tomato puree 
1½ tsp Kashmiri chilli powder
275ml hot vegetable stock
40g walnuts (ie, 1 big handful), chopped 
100g cranberry sauce

“The key here is the chutney, which suggests a vibrantly fruity red such as a beaujolais. Try the gorgeous Nicole Chanrion Côte de Brouilly 2017 £16 Tanners, 13%.”

Steps
Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Wash the rice under cold water, swirling it with your hand until the water runs clear, then drain, cover with cold water and leave to soak.
Cut the top off the pumpkin – keep the lid – and scoop out and discard the seeds (or keep to roast); if you’ve scooped out any flesh, dice and put it to one side. Sprinkle a little salt inside the pumpkin and rub it all over the exposed flesh. Crush the fennel and cumin in a mortar until fairly well ground, then add the cinnamon.
Heat three tablespoons of oil in a frying pan on a medium flame, then add the bashed spices and onions, and cook, stirring, for 12 minutes, until dark brown and starting to crisp. Set aside a tablespoon of the onion mix, stir the garlic and ginger into the pan, then add the reserved diced pumpkin flesh, if any, the tomato puree and a teaspoon of chilli powder. Cook for three to four minutes, until the mixture is dry, then add the salt, well drained rice and hot stock. Bring to a boil and cook, stirring regularly, for exactly 17 minutes, then take off the heat. Taste for salt, mix in the walnuts and spoon the lot into the pumpkin.
Put the onions on top of the rice and close with the reserved lid. Wrap the pumpkin tightly in foil like a badly wrapped present, put on an oven tray and bake for an hour and 10 minutes, or until a knife slips through the side very easily.
Mix the cranberry sauce with a tablespoon of oil and the remaining half-teaspoon of chilli powder.
Unwrap the pumpkin, put on a fancy platter, cut into wedges and serve with the cranberry “chutney”.